# Integration testing

`azimuth-ops` is able to generate integration tests for an [environment](../environments.md)
that can be executed against the deployed Azimuth to validate that it is working correctly.

Currently, the following tests can be generated:

  * Deploy and verify [CaaS clusters](../configuration/12-caas.md)
  * Deploy and verify [Kubernetes clusters](../configuration/10-kubernetes-clusters.md)
  * Deploy and verify [Kubernetes apps](../configuration/11-kubernetes-apps.md)

The generated test suites use [Robot Framework](https://robotframework.org/) to handle the
execution of the tests and gathering and reporting of results.

In Robot Framework,
[test cases](https://robotframework.org/robotframework/latest/RobotFrameworkUserGuide.html#creating-test-cases)
are created by chaining together keywords imported from various
[libraries](https://robotframework.org/robotframework/latest/RobotFrameworkUserGuide.html#using-test-libraries).
Robot Framework also allows the creation of
[custom keyword libraries](https://robotframework.org/robotframework/latest/RobotFrameworkUserGuide.html#creating-test-libraries)
containing domain-specific keywords.

The tests generated by `azimuth-ops` use keywords from a
[custom library](https://github.com/stackhpc/azimuth-robotframework)
for interacting with Azimuth, which in turn uses the
[Azimuth Python SDK](https://github.com/stackhpc/azimuth-sdk) to interact with the
target Azimuth deployment.
The result is that a typical test case looks something like this:

```robotframework  title="Example of a generated test case"
*** Settings ***

Name          CaaS
Library       Azimuth
Test Tags     caas
Test Timeout  15 minutes


*** Test Cases ***


Create workstation
    [Tags]  workstation  create
    ${ctype} =  Find Cluster Type By Name  workstation
    ${params} =  Guess Parameter Values For Cluster Type  ${ctype}
    ${cluster} =  Create Cluster  test-rbe6w  ${ctype.name}  &{params}

Verify workstation
    [Tags]  workstation  verify
    ${cluster} =  Find Cluster By Name  test-rbe6w
    ${cluster} =  Wait For Cluster Ready  ${cluster.id}
    ${url} =  Get Cluster Service URL  ${cluster}  webconsole
    Open Zenith Service  ${url}
    Wait Until Page Title Contains  Apache Guacamole
    ${url} =  Get Cluster Service URL  ${cluster}  monitoring
    Open Zenith Service  ${url}
    Wait Until Page Title Contains  Grafana

Delete workstation
    [Tags]  workstation  delete
    ${cluster} =  Find Cluster By Name  test-rbe6w
    Delete Cluster  ${cluster.id}
```

This example will create a
[CaaS workstation](../configuration/12-caas.md#linux-workstation-appliance) using parameter
values that are guessed based on the cluster type and target Azimuth. It then waits for the
workstation to become `Ready` before verifying that the the Zenith services are behaving
as expected. Finally, the workstation is deleted.

## Generating and executing tests

Before tests can be generated and executed for an [environment](../environments.md), it must
be successfully deployed either [manually](../) or by [automation](./automation.md).

You must also have the Python dependencies installed on the machine that the tests will be
run from. The easiest way to do this is using the
[ensure-venv script](../deployment/index.md#python-dependencies), however the `requirements.txt`
can be used to install them into any Python environment:

```sh
pip install -U pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

The tests can then be generated and executed using the `run-tests` utility script:

```sh
# Activate the target environment
source ./bin/activate my-site

# Generate and run the tests
./bin/run-tests
```

## Configuring test generation

By default, tests cases are generated for:

  * All the installed CaaS cluster types
  * All the installed **active** (i.e. non-deprecated) Kubernetes cluster types
  * All the installed Kubernetes app templates

The following sections describe how to enable, disable and configure tests for the
different types of platform.

!!! tip

    The
    [generate_tests](https://github.com/stackhpc/ansible-collection-azimuth-ops/blob/main/roles/generate_tests/)
    role of `azimuth-ops` is responsible for generating the test cases.

    It has a
    [large number of variables](https://github.com/stackhpc/ansible-collection-azimuth-ops/blob/main/roles/generate_tests/defaults/main.yml)
    that can be used to tune the test generation. This document only discusses the most
    frequently used variables.

### CaaS cluster types

Test cases for CaaS cluster types perform the following steps:

  1. Build the cluster parameters using best-effort guesses plus overrides
  2. Create a cluster using the parameters
  3. Wait for the cluster to become `Ready`
  4. Check that the Zenith services for the cluster are accessible
  5. (Optional) Verify that the page title for the Zenith service contains some expected content
  6. Delete the cluster

!!! info  "Verification of Zenith service page titles"

    Step 5 is used to verify that the Zenith authentication loop brings you back to the
    correct service.

    Currently, no other verification of the behaviour of the service is performed.

!!! warning  "Best-effort guesses for parameter values"

    Best-effort guesses for parameter values are produced in the following way:

      * If the parameter has a default, use that.
      * For `cloud.size` parameters, use the smallest size that satisfies the constraints.
      * For `cloud.ip` parameters, find a free external IP or allocate one.

    All other parameters must be specified explicitly. Guesses can be overridden if not
    appropriate for the test environment.

By default, a test case is generated for all cluster types except those that are explicitly
disabled. This logic can be inverted, so that test cases are **only** generated for cluster
types where they are **explicitly enabled**, using the following variable:

```yaml  title="environments/my-site/inventory/group_vars/all/tests.yml"
generate_tests_caas_default_test_case_enabled: false
```

The following variables are available to affect the test generation for each cluster type:

```yaml  title="environments/my-site/inventory/group_vars/all/tests.yml"
# Indicates if the test case for the cluster type should be enabled
generate_tests_caas_test_case_{cluster_type}_enabled: true

# Used to override the value of the named parameter
generate_tests_caas_test_case_{cluster_type}_param_{parameter_name}: "<parameter_value>"

# Used to configure the expected title fragment for the named Zenith service
generate_tests_caas_test_case_{cluster_type}_service_{service_name}_expected_title: "<title fragment>"

# If a cluster takes a long time to deploy, 
generate_tests_caas_test_case_{cluster_type}_verify_timeout: "45 minutes"
```

!!! warning

    If the cluster type or service name contain dashes (`-`), they will be replaced with
    underscores (`_`).

### Kubernetes cluster templates

### Kubernetes app templates

## Automated testing
