# Managing secrets

Each Azimuth environment contains a small number of files and variable values that
**must** be kept secret. However we would also like to have these files and variables
in version control so that we can track when they have changed and share them with
others in our team.

The way to achieve both these goals is to encrypt the secrets when at rest in the
Git repository. For an Azimuth configuration repository, the recommended method for
doing this is using [git-crypt](https://github.com/AGWA/git-crypt).

`git-crypt` provides transparent encryption and decryption of files in a Git repository
using [Git filters](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Customizing-Git-Git-Attributes). This
allows for a mix of encrypted and unencrypted content in the same repository, which is
exactly what we want for an Azimuth configuration.

By encrypting files when they are committed and decrypting them when they are checked
out, `git-crypt` allows you to work as if the encryption is not present while being
confident that your secrets remain private. Team members can also work on the public
parts of the repository without decrypting the private parts if you wish to maintain
separation of privilege.

`git-crypt` works on entire files, not at the variable level, so it is recommended
that encrypted files contain *only* secret values so that information is not hidden
unnecessarily. To this end, a typical `azimuth-config` environment for a site will
have one or more `group_vars` files in the inventory that are unencrypted, but
secret values will be placed in a `secrets.yaml` that is encrypted.

## Initialising git-crypt

To initialise `git-crypt` for your config repository, first make sure that the CLI
is installed. This can be installed using the package manager on most major Linux
operating systems, using [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) on Mac OSX or by
[building from source](https://github.com/AGWA/git-crypt/blob/master/INSTALL.md).

Then execute the following command to begin encrypting files:

```sh
git-crypt init
```

!!! danger

    If you lose access to the key that `git-crypt` generates to encrypt your repository,
    you will be locked out of the repository for good.

    It is recommended that you export the key (see below) and store it somewhere
    safe, e.g. in your organisation's secret store.

## Verifying which files are encrypted

`azimuth-config` contains a `.gitattributes` file that ensures all `clouds.yaml`,
`secrets.yaml`, `env.secret` and TLS key files in the repository will be encrypted (except those
for the example environment). If required, you can add additional patterns to the
file to encrypt other files.

You can check the files that `git-crypt` is encrypting using the following command:

```sh
git-crypt status -e
```

## Granting access to others

As mentioned above, team members can work on the public parts of the repository
without decrypting the encrypted files. However in order to make a deployment, the
secrets must be decrypted - `git-crypt` refers to this process as "unlocking".

### Using a shared secret key

The simplest way to grant access to the encrypted files in a repository is by sharing
the secret key generated by `git-crypt`. The key is binary, so the best way to share
the key is by base64-encoding it:

```sh
git-crypt export-key - | base64
```

To unlock the repository you must first clone it, then use the key to unlock it:

```sh
# Clone the repository
git clone $REPOSITORY_URL

# Move into the repository directory
cd $REPOSITORY_DIR

# Unlock it using the base64-encoded key
echo $GIT_CRYPT_KEY_B64 | base64 -d | git-crypt unlock -
```

### Using GPG keys

`git-crypt` is also able to grant access to the repository using
[GPG keys](https://www.gnupg.org/). This avoids the use of shared secrets and makes it
explicit in the repository who has access.

A full discussion of the use of GPG is beyond the scope of this documentation, including
the generation of keys, as it differs substantially depending on your operating system.

To add a GPG key to your repository, use the following command:

```sh
git-crypt add-gpg-user USER_ID
```

where `USER_ID` is a key ID, a full fingerprint, an email address, or anything else that
uniquely identifies a public key to GPG.

You will then need to push the changes to the repository that encode the user's access:

```sh
git push
```

To unlock a repository using your GPG identity, just execute:

```sh
git-crypt unlock
```
